(written March 2017)

I love books.  I always have.  When I was a toddler, my parents were thrilled to find that when I woke up at ungodly early hours, they could keep me from wandering around the house waking them up by placing a pile of books at the foot of my bed, and I would sit quietly reading them all morning.

When I got older, that love grew into a love of libraries.  I could spend hours there, rotating between wandering the shelves investigating book spines and back-cover summaries, and curled up reading between the paws of this massive stuffed teddy bear that lived in the library.  When I got to high school, I started a job working as a library page.  I learned a lot, the least of which is my memorization of the entire Dewey Decimal System.  I also got to learn the behind-the-scenes of libraries like checking people out, interlibrary loan, shelving, and book orders.  Also, one of the page duties, for when you had nothing else to do, was a task everyone loathed called "shelf reading".  It was when you picked a section, and went through looking at each book individually, making sure every book was properly ordered and alphabetized.  Most considered it incredibly tedious, but I genuinely enjoyed shelf reading.  I got to hang out in the shelves, going through and really looking at every single book we had.  I also took way longer to shelf read than everyone else, because I kept taking interesting-looking books off the shelves and flipping through them.  I saw it as a way to discover new books and new possibilities for reading and learning.

I was reminded of that recently when this past week, my Hacking the Library class took a field trip to the Harvard Depository.  It’s an offsite Harvard campus that stores millions of books for circulation in the Harvard system.  It’s also, coincidentally, less than a mile from my house where I grew up.  Seriously.  For my whole life, I was living in immediate proximity to the largest physical collection of human knowledge that I've ever seen, and I never knew it.

When we went to the Depository, we got to tour through the shelves.  There are 37 shelving units, each one 40 feet tall and about 300 feet long, in these giant temperature-controlled bunker-like archive buildings.  In total, we estimated there was on the order of 1.6 million books in the place, not even counting all the shelves of film reels, drawers of newspapers and posters, and boxes upon boxes of business and transactional paper records.  It was awe-inspiring and deeply striking.  I couldn't believe I was standing around so much knowledge and collected information.  I wanted to live in that room just to have a chance to look through it all.

But of course, I couldn’t live there, and we left half an hour later.  And I found out that the books and resources in that archive are only available to people through the Harvard system, or the select group of universities or businesses who pay Harvard to rent out a bit of shelf space.  Not only that, but our tour guide told us that about 70% of the materials in the archive had never been requested.  They had arrived, been placed on shelves, and been untouched since.

That made me really sad.  Walking into the place had evoked a lot of sensory memories of libraries: the smell of books, the busyness of people, packing and unpacking boxes of books, shelves upon shelves of reading material.  But it wasn't a library.  It was a proprietary archive owned by one of the richest universities in the country, and very few people were allowed to access what it contained.

As I've become more socialist in my political thinking, the more I recognize and appreciate a lot of the public works projects that currently serve the populace just for the pure good of the people.  When I think of that, I think of places like museums and libraries.  Where else in our country are people encouraged to loiter around just for the purpose of learning?  Where else can you go that is solely dedicated to providing knowledge and experience to people for free, with no expectation of purchasing something.  Even museum gift shops are not an expectation, and libraries are totally free of advertisement or consumerism.  It’s incredible that we have these institutions (and others....thinking of NPR, PBS, etc) that are there just to provide us with free, publicly-funded information.

So that was on my mind as I thought about the average public library: struggling, strapped for cash, but heroically providing public access to internet, books, DVDs, magazines, and more completely free of charge.  I compared that to the Harvard Depository: an institution so rich it built a building way bigger than necessary for all its books, and now rents out shelves to businesses and colleges.  A collection so extensive, yet so exclusive, that most of it never sees the light of day.  All of that knowledge, locked away in the woods in Southborough, Massachusetts.  It bears little resemblance to the libraries I know and love.

That came back on my mind this Friday during our class gallery walk.  A lot of the design choices had an aspect that spoke to educational access.  Obviously the children’s museums fit into that category, but beyond that: there’s a lot of meaty topics in Brown v. Board of Ed, or in digital classrooms like Khan Academy.  

Should access be the overarching goal of an educational institution?  What use is a library full of books that most people can’t read?  What use is a museum if it doesn't allow access, say, for differently-abled children?  What use is a fantastic school with devoted teachers and the perfect curriculum if it’s only available to white kids?  Or if it’s private, only for rich kids?  Horace Mann’s famous quote says that education is the great equalizer, the "balance wheel of the social machinery".  That’s only true if people have the same access to the education they deserve.

But, access isn't enough.  Libraries and museums are amazing, but they aren't enough. Data show that museum visitors (for my particular source, to art museums) are disproportionately white, educated, and middle/upper class.  Why is something so pure, so open to providing public knowledge, used more by the people who already had the privilege of education and access?

It makes me think of some of the discussion of Brown v. Board of Education.  Particularly, I made a sticky-note comment responding to the W.E.B. Du Bois quote.  The forced desegregation of schools provided black students with access to what the authorities said was a higher-quality education.  But Du Bois argues that it wasn't higher quality - keeping the social and emotional learning of the students in mind, just having access to more resources and school funding isn't enough when it’s in an environment structured against you, when your teachers aren't there for you, when your classmates don’t want you there.

What about Khan Academy in relation to access?  Part of their mission is belief in a "free, world-class education for anyone, anywhere".  I agree, that’s great.  But are they providing it?  Sure, they have no ads, and no subscriptions.  They provide that access to content to anyone - anyone who has a computer, an internet connection, and free time.  It makes me think of how libraries are ideally the same kind of all-access equalizer - but in reality, are for anyone, with an asterisk.  You need to have transportation to the physical location, prior literacy, free time.  Libraries vary in accessibility to non-English speakers.  Some don’t have a large-print section.  Some don’t have computer-literacy programs.

What I want to know is, how can we make quality education freely accessible to all, no asterisk?  Even if a museum seems like it provides free and open access to information, it doesn’t exist in a vacuum, and the context of the rest of world impacts that.  All of the previously discussed access concerns apply here.  Museums also have a history of and connotation with imperialism, colonialism, and cultural appropriation.  Some population demographics might feel uncomfortable in such a space, and it can harm them outside of the museum space as well.  It reminds me of a quote from my book *Planning for People in Museum Exhibits*, in a section that talks about recognizing the impact of some museum practices.  It says: "Euro-Americans are used to seeing indigenous people behind glass in museums.  Indigenous people do not see themselves as exotic, extinct specimens."  What museums choose to present, and their design choices in that space, can be harmful to people who don’t even visit the exhibit, through problematic social perceptions perpetrated by the design.  Even if everyone can physically and financially access the space, that doesn't mean that the content within is equally accessible through a sociocultural lens.

Context matters in libraries, which is why bookmobiles started popping up in rural communities where transportation to a central library couldn't be expected.  Context matters in school desegregation, when a narrow view of students in a well-resourced school seemed positive until you looked at the broader context of racial prejudice and how it affected the students in the school.  Context matters in digital learning.  We talked about the difference between self-paced learning, and self-directed learning, and how Khan Academy only really provides access to learning if the student in question feels comfortable learning from a progression of narrated videos.  Context matters in the current charter school debate, which seem like they would expand access to school choice and quality education, but don’t account for the students left behind at broke public schools.

Why do I feel the way that I do about libraries?  Why did I feel so awestruck stepping into the Depository, with its massive and imposing shelf structures dominating its landscape?  Well, I've been privileged enough to grow up in an environment that encouraged me to feel that way.  I had parents who had the time and the motivation to bring me to the library as a kid.  I had a family with enough money to keep the house warm, well-lit, and stocked with good reading material.  They had time and energy to read me their favorite books before bedtime each day.  I had parents who didn't work on weekends, and could use the time off to take me to museums and historic monuments.  My cultural background means I never had to question whether museum exhibits were personally inclusive or "meant for me".

The takeaway I’m wrestling with is about reconciling this privilege with access and freedom of learning.  As my life moves forward, I continue to consider myself a learner, and patron of public information centers like libraries and museums.  But I’m also growing into a role that could very well lead me to be in the shoes of a designer of such spaces as well.  And with that responsibility, how can we make learning spaces that are truly inclusive, truly accessible, and truly free?  How can I acknowledge my privilege in knowing that, when I try to make these things, I am (most times) not the person being excluded or left behind, but still work towards fixing that.  How can we, as a society, invest in more in pure and free learning for the public good?  How can we have more libraries, and more museums, and more spaces like them.  But when we do that, we need to be sure that they’re actually living up to that tagline of free and open access to learning.

Sources:
- http://www.aam-us.org/docs/center-for-the-future-of-museums/demotransaam2010.pdf
- http://museumtwo.blogspot.com/2015/02/audience-demographics-and-census-do-we.html
- http://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet06
https://www.khanacademy.org/about
- "Planning for People in Museum Exhibits" by Kathleen McLean (page 160)

