*(originated Dec 2016)*

I have a couple metaphors I've been thinking about in order to convey the way that I feel about teaching practices. One is [[tabletop RPGs|Dungeons & Dragons]]. In a D&D game, there are several players, and one Dungeon Master (DM) who guides the players and creates their experience. In my D&D experience, there are two major kinds of DMs. One has a very set plan they want you to follow. The plotline is all mapped out in their head, and the players as characters have a set role in their mind. The gameplay feels as though it is moving along a track, and whenever a player makes a decision that would branch from the goal, the DM incorporates it in and finds a way to keep ushering the players towards the original goal. The other type of DM is the one that creates a world and drops the players in with a set of goals or initial plans, and tells you to run free. They allow players to burn down important plot points or kill a main character. Here, the DM needs to be on their feet and ready with more content, because there are infinitely many paths the players might choose to take, and the DM needs to be ready to orchestrate whatever the players throw at them.

As a teacher, I want to be the second kind of DM. I want to allow for that kind of student autonomy and self-discovery as they move through and explore a world I’ve set up for them. A good teacher does not drive students towards the end-goal relentlessly, ignoring their decision-making processes and preferences. Instead, a teacher should take those decisions into account, adjust accordingly, and respond to student voice in determining outcomes. In this sense, the teacher and learner are co-designing an experience together for the best benefit to the learner.

Finally, I think the end-goal of teaching is similar to what I've learned about advocacy work. In advocacy, it can be deeply harmful to a community to come in as a privileged outsider, bringing in external resources and trying to "save" a community. Instead, the strategy of [[Asset-Based Community Development]] empowers community members towards leveraging existing assets in the community and recognizing one’s own power to make change. In the end, this kind of advocacy work is about working to make oneself not needed by sustainable, community-driven work.

In the same way, I believe that teaching can be about that same principle. I do not want to be a teacher who presents myself as the ultimate authority on the content, skills, or attitudes being learned. Instead, I want to recognize the unique experience of each student and how to leverage that to provide the right amount of guidance so that the student can start taking on that role for themselves. In the end, working to make yourself not needed as a teacher is about empowering students – encouraging confidence in one’s own ability to learn, and providing the scaffolding until students feel comfortable standing up on their own and running with it. If the teacher is the sole source of learning, the learner can only learn as much as the teacher. Instead, working towards making the teacher’s role unnecessary equips students with the ability to understand what they want to learn and how to go about it on their own.

These facets of student empowerment, choice, and voice are very important to me as a teacher. I want to share my passion with students, but in a way that puts them at the center of the process, and me as the facilitator and mentor, providing my own passion and experience and support them in the journey of taking that and shaping it into a learning experience that works for them. In teaching practices, I try to constantly be cognizant of what I’m doing and recognize the intention behind my teaching decisions. I try to reflect constantly on whether my decisions align with my philosophy and grow from my own understanding of my work. Through this, I can improve and incorporate student feedback, growing through my experience and reflection into the best teacher I can be.